



Wedge



petites cohortes avec des omics différentes de wgs != gdes cohortes multiomics subtyping ; complementarity

PhD topic: Integrating multi-omics and deep phenotyping to dissect evolutionary drivers of chromosome instability in ovarian cancer



=> mutation A and mutation B that do not co-occur or occur in an evolutionary context as statement instead of protein A and protein B (a way to investigate co-occurence and mutual exclusivity)

=> CNA as biomarker (oesophagous cancer) [NB: with matched multiple biopsies data] Killcoyne et al. 2020

=> lung cohort analysis Zhang et al. 2021 -> not integrative: subtype definition based on CNA; then correlation with other genomic features; but not an integrative subtype definition

=> renal cancer => subtype definition ?! refinement integrative ?

low number of samples ?

patient matched locally distinct

mono-omics unsupervised clustering



multi-site; heterogeneity

phylogenetic reconstruction

clonality

serial data collection

bayesian network analysis because pairwise approach cannot detect higher level dependencies



### Characterizing genetic intra-tumor heterogeneity across 2,658 human cancer genomes - Dentro et al. 2021

Some of these mutations are drivers
that confer fitness advantages to their host cells and can lead to clonal expansions (Garraway

Late clonal expansions, spatial segregation, and incomplete selective sweeps result in genetically distinct cellular popula- tions that manifest as intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH)

the cells comprising a clonal expansion share the unique set of mutations of the initi- ating cell.

Each of those mutations is present in the same cancer cell fraction (CCF), which may be estimated by adjusting muta- tion allele frequencies for local copy number and sample purity.

Subsequent clustering of mutations based on their CCF yields the ‘‘subclonal architecture’’ of a sample (Dentro et al., 2017): es- timates of the number of distinct tumor cell populations (sub- clones), their CCF, and assigned mutations.

Single-sample analyses can underestimate ITH because variants found to be clonal in one region may be subclonal in another (the ‘‘illusion of clonality’’). Conversely, any mutations detected as subclonal will remain so, no matter how many regions are assayed. Therefore, single-sample analysis establishes a conservative lower limit of ITH

we develop a robust consensus strategy to call copy number and cluster mutations to assess ITH and its origin, drivers, and role in tumor development.

We apply these ap- proaches to 2,658 tumors from 38 histologically distinct cancer types from the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) initiative (ICGC/TCGA Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes Consortium, 2020). Whole-genome

Whole-genome sequencing pro- vides orders of magnitude more point mutations than exomes, greater resolution to detect CNAs, and the ability to call struc- tural variants (SVs). These increase the breadth and depth of our analyses and reveal pervasive ITH across cancer types.

Consensus copy number, SNVs, and purity estimates served
as input to 11 subclonal reconstructing methods, and the results of these methods were combined into a single consensus for each tumor (Figure 1A; STAR Methods). Addressing the probabi- listic nature of subclonal reconstruction, we developed three consensus approaches using different summary outputs of indi- vidual methods. We

we used the output of one of our consensus approaches, combining all individual methods, as the basis for our global assignment strategy (STAR Methods). We thus ob- tained, for each tumor, the number of detectable subclones; the fraction of subclonal SNVs, indels, SVs, and CNAs; as well as assignments of SNVs, indels, and SVs to subclones

**Tracking signature activities across cancer timelines**

Each source can be characterized by a probability distribution over 96 mutation types, known as a mutational signature (Alexandrov

The rate at which new mutations are generated by a certain process can vary over time and is known as the **signature activity**.

multiple mutational sources can be active in the same tumor.

a probabilistic method called TrackSig to fit the evolutionary trajectories of signature activities in individual tumors

*Source of mutation signatures* 

We used the Beta2 release of the mutation signatures byPCAWG working group 7 (Alexandrov et al., 2020). For each sample, we only considered mutation signatures marked as active.

*TrackSig fitting of evolutionary trajectories of signature activity* 

First, we order the mutations based on their approximate relative order of occurrence in the tumor. 

Generally, if the mutation occurred early in the tumor development, it will be present at high **cellular prevalence** (CP), whereas late mutations have lower CP. We exploit this observation to infer the pseudo-time of mutation occurrence. 

We take the **variant allele frequency** (VAF) of the mutations as computed from the read counts. To eliminate the effects of quantization noise we then re-sample the VAF value from the posterior distribution given the variant and reference read counts. 

VAF estimates are converted into ‘‘**average mutation copy number/cell**’’- space by multiplying the CP by the copy number. 

This space yields a **‘‘pseudo-time’’ ordering of mutations**, but how this relates to real time is unknown. For convenience, we divide the time-ordered mutations into equal bins of 100 mutations. The resulting bins, each corresponding to one time point, constitute a pseudo-timeline of tumor development, which we leverage to map the signa- ture trajectories. Timelines are constructed separately for each sample

This method does not consider branching tumor evolution.

Next, we estimate the **signature proportions**.

At each time point, the SNVs are classified into 96 types based on their trinucleotide context. Then we fit a mixture of multinomials, where each component multinomial describes one of the known active signature dis- tributions over the 96 types.

. Derived mixture component coefficients correspond to the **signature activities** and sum to 1 for each time point. The activity value reflects the fraction of the mutations generated by the associated mutational process. For ease of interpre- tation, activities are given as percentage.

By estimating the activities at each time point, a set of **trajectories** is obtained. Each tra- jectory represents the activity of the corresponding mutational process during the evolutionary history of the tumor sample.

we seek to find the **time points at which signature activities change substantially**, as these represent changes in the activity
of the different mutational processes. If certain mutational processes have become more or less active in a subclone when compared to the clone (e.g., inactivation of double strand break repair in the subclone), its emergence may be accompanied by a drastic shift in the trajectories. Otherwise,

To detect the signature change points, we use **Pruned Exact Linear Time (PELT)** algorithm (Killick et al., 2012). PELT is based on dynamic programming. The algorithm iterates over the time points and re-computes the multinomial mixtures for all the mutations at both sides from the potential change point, treating each side as a single bin. We estimate the likelihood of the data split according to the potential change point. A point that maximizes the likelihood is considered a new change point. The Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) is used to determine the optimal number of change points: introducing any new change point has to be accompanied by a sufficient increase in likelihood.

**Analysis of drivers in clinically targetable genes**

To assess the potential clinical relevance of subclonal architecture inference, we considered driver mutations (SNVs and indels) in
genes and pathways for which drugs have been developed or are currently in development. This allows us to estimate frequency of cases in which the only currently actionable mutation is subclonal.

### Prostate cancer evolution from multilineage primary to single lineage metastases with implications for liquid biopsy - Woodcock et al. 2020

We infer detailed reconstructions of tumor phylogenies in ten prostate cancer patients with fatal disease, and investigate them in conjunction with histopathology and tumor DNA extracted from blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Substantial

Substantial evolution occurs within the prostate, resulting in branching into multiple spatially intermixed lineages. 

One dominant lineage emerges that initiates and drives sys- temic metastasis, where polyclonal seeding between sites is common. 

Routes to metastasis differ between patients, and likely genetic drivers of metastasis distinguish the metastatic lineage from the lineage that remains confined to the prostate within each patient. 

**Body fluids capture features of the dominant lineage, and subclonal expansions that occur in the metastatic phase are non-uniformly represented.** 

Cerebrospinal fluid analysis reveals lineages not detected in blood-borne DNA, suggesting possible clinical utility

In this study we use deep genomic sequencing and histopathological information to trace tumor evolution both within the prostate and during metastasis

We inferred subclonal structure from all tissue samples using the DPclust method21 (Supplementary Figs. 1–10), and constructed phylogenetic trees for all ten men (Fig. 1) following the Sum and Crossing Rules22 (Methods).

*Tumor cellularity estimation*. For the 51 samples that were previously sequenced with WGS, we used the WGS-based purity estimates generated with the Battenberg algorithm (https://github.com/cancerit/cgpBattenberg).

*Copy number estimation*. CNA in the studied samples were estimated using CNVkit24 to estimate copy number profiles using the off-target reads in our tar- geted sequencing dat

*CCF estimation*. The CCF was calculated by adjusting the variant allele frequencies with copy number and tumor purity following the method in Bolli et al

*Mutation clustering.* The Dirichlet Process clustering (DPClust) method21 was used to group mutations present at similar CCF [cancer cell fractions (CCF)] in each tumor sample. DPClust

*Phylogenetic tree construction.* Patient-specific phylogenetic trees incorporating mutation clusters identified by DPClust were manually constructed using the Sum and Crossing Rules22. 

the sum rule operates upon the premise that if the CCFs of two mutation clusters in any sample add up to more than the CCF of their shared ancestral cluster, they must be collinear

the crossing rule states that if two mutation clusters B and C are descendants of mutation cluster A, and if cluster B has higher CCF than cluster C in one sample and cluster C has higher CCF than cluster B in another sample, clusters B and C must be branching. 

Underlying the Sum and Crossing rules is the Infinite Sites Assumption, which states that each mutation has occurred only once

*Chronological timing.* **Mutational signature** **1** is known to represent **a clock-like process as it is generated at relatively constant rate**. We used WGS SNV calls derived from fresh frozen samples from Gundem et al.11 to identify sets of point mutations that corresponded to the trunk until the first intra-prostatic branch, between the first branch and the first metastatic seeding event, and then from seeding until sampling occurred. **The non-negative matrix factorization method used to identify mutational signatures** is susceptible to errors when mutational counts are low, as may be the case in some of our tree segments. As signature 1 consists of C > T mutations in a CpG context, we circumvented this issue by using raw counts of these mutational types as a proxy for signature 1. These were gen- erated based on the DPClust output where each single nucleotide variant from a patient was assigned to a subclone. For each variant in each subclone, the Bio- strings (version 2.48.0) and BSgenome (1.48.0) Bioconductor packages in R (ver- sion 3.5.1) were used to retrieve the 5’ and 3’ adjacent bases of the mutation based on the mutation coordinate. A count was kept ofC > T mutations in a CpG context on either the forward or reverse strand

### Genomic copy number predicts esophageal cancer years before transformation - Killcoyne et al. 2020

Recent studies show that aneuploidy and driver gene muta- tions precede cancer diagnosis by many years1–4
. We assess
whether these genomic signals can be used for early detection and pre-emptive cancer treatment using the neoplastic pre- cursor lesion Barrett’s esophagus as an exemplar5

Shallow
whole-genome sequencing of 777 biopsies, sampled from 88 patients in Barrett’s esophagus surveillance over a period of up to 15 years, shows that genomic signals can distinguish progressive from stable disease even 10 years before histo- pathological transformation.

These meth- ods are low-cost and applicable to standard clinical biopsy samples. Compared

**accurate biomarkers** of early cancer
progression are needed to stratify patients. **Copy number (CN) alterations**, although common in cancer, are rarely found in nor- mal tissues, raising the question of whether these signals could help diagnose patients earlier

in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC), which has a 5-year survival rate of less than 20%7
. Its precur-
sor tissue is known as Barrett’s esophagus (BE); however, the risk for a patient with BE progressing to EAC is only around 0.3% per annum8
.Low- (LGD) and high-grade dysplasia (HGD) are used as surrogates for early cancer transformation and trigger intervention, commonly by endoscopic resection and radio- frequency ablation (RFA)9,10
.

Improvements in risk assessment have focused on identifying
individual molecular biomarkers, particularly p53 expression12–16 and DNA-methylation changes17,18
. However,** **identification of**
mutational biomarkers for progression has been difficult, due to the low frequency of recurrent point mutations** in either BE19
or
EAC20,21. Instead, EAC and BE are characterized by **early and fre- quent genomic (CN and structural) instability20****–24
. As **ongoing**
**genomic instability leads, to a large extent, to clonal diversity**, mul- tiple investigations have focused on the **heterogeneity and diversity of BE tissues25**
**as markers of higher risk**26

We investigated **genome-wide CN instability as a marker** for risk
of progression using shallow whole-genome sequencing (sWGS; average depth 0.4×) in a retrospective, demographically matched, case–control cohort of patients

the genomes of individual progressive patients display a generalized disorder across the genomes that varies between samples and over time (Fig. 1b). In addition, CN changes were not confined to cytological atypia (for

The CN information and a measure of overall complexity (see
Methods and also Extended Data Fig. 1) were used to generate **a crossvalidated, elastic-net-regularized logistic regression model of progression and classification**, with the endpoint HGD or intramu- cosal cancer (IMC; see Methods), and subsequently validated using an independent cohort of 76 patients (n = 213 samples), alongside an orthogonal validation of the Seattle BE Study SNP array samples (n = 1,272) from 248 patients

. We encoded all CN data on a genome-wide scale by taking a per-sample weighted average across the segmented values per 5-Mb window, and mean standardizing per genomic window across the entire cohort. To

To evaluate chromosomal instability on a larger scale, we averaged the segmented values across chromosome arms and adjusted each 5-Mb window by the difference between the window and the arm. The resulting data were 589 5-Mb windows and 44 chromosome arms

We additionally included a measure of genomic complexity (cx) by summing, per sample, the 5-Mb windows that had CN values 2 s.d. from the mean

elastic-net regression with the R glmnet39
package to fit
regression models with varying regularization parameters. Fivefold crossvalidation, repeated 10×, was performed on a per-patient basis, removing all samples from 20% of patients in each fold. This

The model was additionally tuned on two parameters: (1) QDNAseq bin
size and (2) elastic-net regression penalty, between 0 (ridge) and 1 (lasso). We

### Genomic and evolutionary classification of lung cancer in never smokers - Zhang et al. 2021

Here high-coverage whole-genome sequencing of 232 LCINS showed 3 subtypes defined by copy number aberrations. 

The dominant subtype (piano), which is rare in lung cancer in smokers, features somatic UBA1 mutations, germline AR variants and stem cell-like properties, including low mutational burden, high intratumor heterogeneity, long telomeres, frequent KRAS mutations and slow growth, as suggested by the occurrence of cancer drivers’ progenitor cells many years before tumor diag- nosis. 

The other subtypes are characterized by specific amplifications and EGFR mutations (mezzo-forte) and whole-genome doubling (forte). 

No strong tobacco smoking signatures were detected, even in cases with exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke

As part of the Sherlock-Lung study15 ,
we evaluated the genomic landscape and mutational processes in
232 treatment-naïve LCINS using high-coverage WGS

**Unsupervised clustering of arm-level SCNAs identified three distinct subtypes**, with increasing
levels of SCNAs

Notably, several other genomic features of LCINS differed between SCNA-defined sub- types.

While 24 out of 25 recurrently mutated genes (Supplementary
Table 4 and Supplementary Fig. 7) were previously identified as drivers in the TCGA Pan-Cancer cohort21
, many of them had sub-
stantial frequency differences from LUAD in smokers and across SCNA subtypes (Extended

The median number of SVs per tumor varied widely between
SCNA subtypes

Mutational signatures in LCINS. Mutational signature deconvolu- tion of single base substitutions (SBS) using SigProfiler26,27
identified
14 previously reported signatures from the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC) (Supplementary

*Genomic instability.* Overall, 36.2% of tumors had WGD, with much higher prevalence in the forte subtype

*The **evolutionary history** of LCINS.* We reconstructed the likely order of acquisition of recurrent genomic aberrations, including SCNAs, WGD and common cancer driver genes within each of the SCNA subtypes in LUAD (Methods

In all three subtypes, mutations in the driver genes TP53, RBM10, KRAS or EGFR were generally early events, occurring before both WGD and most other SCNAs.

Using the proportion of mutations on two or more chromosome
copies allows for the **relative timing of clonal copy number gains and copy-neutral LOH** (CN LOH)

We adopted a previously validated **model using clock-like**
**mutations** (CpG>TpG in an NpCpG context) to time the appear- ance of the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) of all tumor
cells.

The MRCA, by definition, possesses all driver mutations for tumorigenesis

*Genome-wide somatic variant calling.* The analysis-ready BAM files were processed using four different algorithms, including MuTect89
, MuTect2, Strelka
v.2.9.0 (ref. 90
) and TNscope91 . To

Germline variant calling. Final BAM files from paired normal samples were used to call germline variants using the GATK Haplotyper algorithm in Sentieon’s genomics package v.201808.03. Default

Driver gene discovery. The IntOGen pipeline v.2020.02.0123, which combines
seven state-of-the-art computational methods, was employed to detect signals of positive selection in the mutational pattern of genes across the cohort

SCNA analysis. We used the updated Battenberg v.2.2.8 algorithm98 to estimate the
clonality of each segmentation, tumor purity and ploidy (

Unsupervised clustering of copy number profiles including both major clone and subclone segmentations were generated based on relative copy number log2 (copy number/Tumor_Ploidy) using the Euclidean distance and Ward’s method

Recurrent copy number alterations from WGS at the gene level were identified using GISTIC v.2.0

WGD identification. Multiple methods were used to determine the genome doubling status for each tumor. First, tumors were considered to have undergone WGD if >50% of their autosomal genome had a major copy number (MCN); Next, we applied a modified version of the published WGD algorithm EstimateClonality; we manually checked the Battenberg CNA profile to resolve tumors with ambiguous WGD calling

SV calling and clustering. The Meerkat algorithm v.0.185105 was used to call
somatic SVs and estimate the corresponding genomic positions of breakpoints

TL estimation. We estimated TL in kb using TelSeq v.0.0.2107

*Mutational signature analysis.* Mutational signatures were analyzed by the updated computational framework SigProfiler

HRD [Homologous recombination deficiency] by HRDetect. We applied HRDetect to assess the HRD as described in previous studies

Assessment of LOH. HLA LOH was identified by the LOHHLA algorithm v.1.0 Patient-specific HLA genotypes were inferred by POLYSOLVER v.1.0109

Prediction of chronological timing. We adopted the approach from the PCAWG42 to **estimate the elapsed time between the appearance of the MRCA and the last observable subclone** in our Sherlock-Lung study. Briefly, the **number of clock-like CpG>TpG mutations in an NpCpG context** was counted for all tumors, accounting for tumor ploidy as well as clonal and subclonal mutations. [...] The **latency of the MRCA** was estimated for each tumor, adopting an estimated tumor acceleration rate of 1×. We subtracted the estimated latency from age at diagnosis to obtain the real-time age at which the MRCA likely emerged, grouping tumors by the presence of specific genomic alterations or features with >3% frequency

Timing model of ordering events. Mutational drivers and CNAs were simultaneously incorporated into the timing model based on the clonality of the events. [...] Variants were then classified as clonal (CCF = 1) and subclonal (CCF < 1) using DPClust. All events were combined per sample and ordered based on the CCF. Where more than one tree could be inferred based on subclonal events, all possible trees were generated and randomly chosen in each iteration of the ordering events. 

To time the events based on the entire dataset, events were ordered based on clonality (randomized clonal events followed by a sampled tree of subclonal events) in each sample. 

The PlackettLuce model111,112
for ordering partial rankings was
implemented (https://github.com/hturner/PlackettLuce) to infer the order of events based on the ordering matrix of the entire dataset while allowing for unobserved events. This



### Subclone Eradication Analysis Identi fi es Targets for Enhanced Cancer Therapy and Reveals L1 Retrotransposition as a Dynamic Source of Cancer Heterogeneity - Ketola et al. 2021

we introduce **Differential Subclone Eradication and Resistance (DSER) analysis**, a method developed to **identify molecular targets for improved therapy** by direct comparison of genomic features of eradicated and resistant subclones in pre- and posttreatment sam- ples from a patient with BRCA2-deficient metastatic prostate cancer.

A resistant cancer-cell subclone = a population of cancer cells remaining after a patient has received therapy targeting the original cancer-cell population.

a cancer-cell sub- clone eradicated by therapy is relatively hard to define, because it requires reasonable proof that the eradicated subclone no longer exists in the patient after a specific therapy

key characteristics of an eradicated subclone cannot be imputed solely from characteristics in a resistant subclone, because the point at which characteristics defining resistance arose is not known a priori.

We recently reported a clinically important subclone eradicated by carboplatin chemotherapy in a metastatic prostate cancer (mPC) patient “A34” (2). To our knowl- edge, this is the first reported genomic evidence ofsubclone eradication in a solid tumor, a metastatic prostate cancer where we previously reported somatic L1 retrotransposon activity as a source of traceable genomic heterogeneity (3

these findings led us to hypothesize that (i) Pro- spectively planned, side-by-side Differential Subclone Eradication and Resistance (DSER) genomic analysis in individual patients with partial responses could provide a uniquely powerful intermediate step for advancing precision cancer medicine, and (ii) L1 activation itself is a dynamic source of genomic heterogeneity leading to eradicability or resistance, and perhaps this response could be blocked by existing medications

By combining deep longitudinal analysis of clinical, liquid biopsy,
and tumor genomic data in patient A340s mPC, we identified what we believe to be the first genomically documented case of differential cancer subclone eradication and resistance in a solid tumor

In the current study, we sought to delve deeper, to identify potential under- lying causes ofdifferential susceptibility to therapy, and to test the idea that DSER analysis could provide a highly informative intermediate step toward effective precision cancer medicine. DSER

DSER can be defined as a direct comparison of molecular attributes of pre- and posttreat- ment cancer subclones eradicated by and resistant to therapy to identify molecular targets for therapeutic conversion of resistant subclones to an eradicable state



### Genomic evidence supports a clonal diaspora model for metastases of esophageal adenocarcinoma - Noorani et al. 2020

The poor outcomes in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) prompted us to interrogate the pattern and timing of metastatic spread.

Whole-genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of 388 samples across 18 individuals with EAC showed, in 90% of patients, that multiple subclones from the primary tumor spread very rapidly from the primary site to form multiple metasta- ses, including lymph nodes and distant tissues—a mode of dissemination that we term ‘clonal diaspora’

Metastatic subclones at autopsy were present in tissue and blood samples from earlier time points.

the patterns of metastatic spread are often unpredictable in terms of time course and anatomical location

the current median survival time is still less than 1 year (ref.

knowledge of how genetic diversity emerges dur- ing metastasis remains limited. The lack of understanding is in part due to the practical challenge of collecting multiple samples over space and time from patients with advanced-stage cancer

we designed a pro-
spective study with extensive sampling over time, including samples from diagnosis and surgery, as well as at warm autopsy

There were three main steps in this study, comprising: (1) clonal discovery at autopsy (2) spatial tracking at autopsy; and (3) temporal tracking at earlier time points 

50× WGS to construct a phylogenetic tree for each patient, to understand the relationship between the primary and meta- static tumors (Fig.

Mutation clustering was per- formed and the fractions of tumor cells carrying each set of muta- tions (cancer cell fractions (CCFs)) within each sample were used to determine: (1) the clonal and subclonal architecture of each tumor (subclonal CCF < 95%; clonal CCF > 95%); (2) the hierarchy of events; and (3) the distance of these subclonal or clonal clusters from the most recent common ancestor (MRCA)

These analyses enabled us to construct phylogenetic trees

The events identified as most
frequent in previous studies occurred in the trunks of the phyloge- netic trees, consistent with their previous classification as drivers

Amplifications (gene names
in red) were often truncal, but also observed on the branches of the phylogenetic tree, providing evidence of divergence during later evolutionary stages (Fig.

There was no significant difference in the overall number of struc- tural variants between primary and metastatic samples; However, a larger proportion of structural variants in metastatic samples were ret- rotranspositions of mobile elements than in the primary samples

This contrasts with pancreatic cancer (where deletions and fold-back inversions are more com- mon in metastases) and breast cancer (where tandem duplications dominate)21
.

the high rate of L1 transposon activ-
ity in EAC has recently been associated with high activity in the germline22

the proportion of structural variants found uniquely in metastases or in primary sites was higher than that of SNVs (Fig. 2 and Extended Data 4a), suggesting an increase in genomic instability in later stages of the disease. 

eight mutational signatures were observed, 	

both nodal and solid organ metastases, allowing a direct comparison of the genomic architecture between different metastatic sites

A striking observation was that nine out of ten patients had a clone that was followed by dis- persion of multiple subclones from the primary to discrete meta- static sites, resulting in a model of metastasis that we term ‘clonal diaspora’. 

In most patients, this dispersion was visually stellate in nature, this being defined as a feature of a phylogenetic tree involv- ing three or more branches leading from a single founder clone (see

In the second step of the study, we tracked the spread of metas- tases across a wider range of lymph node and distant tissue sites by performing 1× WGS in a further 248 tissue samples from six patients with autopsy

we used this method to detect the spread of clones and subclones previously identified using 50× WGS

the samples that grouped together based on shared clonal origins were widely dispersed anatomically

A comparison of lymph node location and genomic contiguity
showed no evidence of tropism (that is, genomically similar lymph nodes did not occupy nearby anatomical locations). Lymph

Similarly, a comparison of lymph node and solid organ metastases showed scant evidence for tropism, with the exception of P1 (Supplementary

We further traced regions of the primary tumor at autopsy
that had similar subclonal compositions to each of the metastases, shown as adjacent tumor maps; Subclones occupied spatially distinct areas in the primary tumor.

We also looked for driver amplifications post-MRCA [most recent common ancestor] or post-
diaspora on a per-patient basis, and identified selection in six out of ten patients. However, this is likely to be an underestimate

The ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous SNVs (dN/dS) was analyzed across all patients in order to assess the presence or absence of positive selection30 . The results indicated
positive selection in both clonal and subclonal genomes, albeit with lower levels of selection within subclones



To examine the timing and speed of metastatic spread, we analyzed base substitution muta- tional signatures, particularly the aging signature, which features a predominance of C>T transition in the NpCpG trinucleotide con- text (Figs.

Signature 1 arises from the spontaneous or enzymatic deamina-
tion of methylated cytosines, which is an endogenous process that occurs continuously in both healthy and cancerous cells. This has been shown to act as a molecular clock27,31–35
, and was therefore used
here as a method to examine the temporal relationship between metastases.

Using a previously described method for deconvolving mutational signatures35
, we observed that signature 1 was present
in the trunk but absent in all subclones that constituted diaspora

To account for the possibility that the number of signature 1 mutations in branch

To estimate the time of appearance of diaspora, we compared the num- ber of these characteristic mutations that occurred along the trunk to the parental red clone marking the onset of diaspora with those that occurred on the longest branch leading from this point. The

The median proportion of such mutations occurring before the onset of diaspora was 0.911; thus in the majority of patients, one might deduce that little time has elapsed between the appearance of the cell that is ancestral to disseminating cells and the individual cells that seeded each of the metastases

With the exception of P8, the proportion of mutations attributed to signature 1 was signifi- cantly lower after the parental (red) clone on the phylogenetic tree, suggest-
ing an increase in the activity of other processes in later evolution- ary stages

Between 8 and 36% of the subclones and clones observed in samples taken from autopsy were also pres- ent in the diagnostic samples (Supplementary

We assessed the clonal composition of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) at earlier time points in seven blood samples from five patients

Analysis of ctDNA showed that in all patients the truncal cluster from autopsy was also represented in plasma

mutations from between zero and seven subclonal clusters were identified from plasma

The majority of driver CNAs identified in the MRCA of each
tumor from 50× WGS of tissue samples were also identified in plasma, both at autopsy and at earlier time points (Fig.

Notably, however, amplifica- tions found only in oligometastases or in post-diaspora subclones from 50× sequencing were not identified in plasma, despite many of them being detected in 1× sequencing of tissue samples (Fig.

for the majority of EACs, a complex mode of spread is operative

We observe multiple subclones, each seeding multiple metastatic sites

These subclones are frequently derived from a single parental clone, generally resulting in a stellate pattern on the phylogenetic tree.

Metastases in solid organs can bypass nodal involvement, and sam- ples within solid organ sites frequently resemble distant metastases more closely than neighboring metastases within the same organ (that is, no tropism is observed). All

All metastases appear to have spread directly from the primary site, with little or no evidence of metastasis-to-metastasis seeding

. We suggest that this pattern be referred to as a ‘diaspora’, by

, it is associated with
the observation that multiple cell populations in metastatic sites are directly linked to the primary site of origin and that individual sub- clones seed multiple tissue types

A number of features were frequently associated with this phe-
nomenon

(1) a stellate pattern on the phylogenetic tree, defined as three or more subclones emerging from the founder clones; 

(2) a lack of signature 1 mutations post- MRCA or post-diaspora; 

(3) spread of subclones to multiple organs of different types; and 

(4) evidence for selection in post-diaspora genotypes

Unlike the *parallel model*, the diaspora model implies that metastasis formation occurs after the majority of evolution has occurred in the primary tumor

Whereas the *linear model* predicts that a single
subclone-seeded lymph node site is followed by transmission to distant organs, the diaspora model posits <u>simultaneous seeding of multiple sites</u> directly from the primary site.

the *Big Bang model* proposes <u>neutral dynamics</u>, whereas we observe strong evidence for selection in sub- clonal populations in the form of dN/dS ratios and the occurrence of subclonal driver amplifications (Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 8 and Supplementary Fig. 2). Moreover, the clonal maps of the primary tumor show subclones that occupy spatially discrete areas of the primary tumor (Fig. 4), in contrast with the <u>intermixed subclones</u> predicted by the Big Bang model40

**Mutation clustering and phylogenetic tree construction**.  For each patient, we inferred the number of subclones and the fraction of tumor cells within each subclone using a previously described Bayesian Dirichlet process to cluster mutations according to their mutation copy number49

We extended this process into n dimensions for patients with n related samples, where the numbers of mutant reads obtained from multiple related samples were modeled as independent binomial distributions.

The Bayesian Dirichlet process uses Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to sample the CCF values of the subclones in each sample. This method (MCMC) is run for 1,000 iterations and outputs, and for each iteration, the sampled position of each cluster, pih
and
the weight of each cluster, Vh, which is an estimate of the proportion of mutations
assigned to that cluster. The

To obtain the set of subclones present within a tumor and their CCF values, the following procedure was followed:

- Using the aforementioned MCMC sampling of CCF values from all n samples, for every possible triplet of samples, we obtained posterior density estimates of CCF using; We assigned each mutation to the cluster in whose basin of attraction it was most likely to fall, using CCF values from MCMC sampling
- Across the set of all possible triplets, we identified sets of mutations that were assigned to the same cluster in every triplet. The CCF of each cluster was esti- mated as the mean CCF of the mutations assigned to that cluster
- again using the aforementioned MCMC sampling of CCF values from all n samples, for every pair of samples, we plotted the mutation density, w

To determine the most likely phylogenetic tree, we applied two rules, as described previously52. Briefly,

1. the ‘**sum rule’** (which is an extension of the pigeonhole principle described in ref. 11), asserts that if a subclone A is ancestral to
   both subclones B and C and if the summed CCFs of B and C exceed the CCF of A in any sample, the relationship between the subclones must be linear

2. The ‘**crossing rule**’ is applied to tree construction from multiple samples. It asserts that if the CCF of B is higher than the CCF of C in sample X and the CCF of B is lower than the CCF of C in sample Y, B and C must be in separate branches of the phylogenetic tree (that is, they are not collinear).

For all clonally related samples, the same underlying phylogenetic tree must exist. This

the sum rule and crossing rule only strictly apply when
the infinite sites assumption is obeyed

The **infinite sites assumption** states that each mutation only occurs once during the lifetime of a tumor and that mutations never revert to normal. A 

the infinite sites assumption is not always followed in real data, for two reasons:
• CNAs (specifically losses and loss of heterozygosity) have the effect of remov- ing mutations in the deleted region, resulting in the apparent ‘reversion’ of a mutation.
• The same mutation may occur on more than one occasion, particularly if the mutation is a driver mutation

, we take account of CNAs when calculating the CCF of each
mutation. In

Identification of CCF. For each mutation, we calculated the mutation copy number as previously described, using the mutant allele burden, tumor cellularity and locus specific copy number in the tumor and matched normal

The mutation
copy number reflects the percentage of tumor cells within a sample carrying that mutation, and permits the cross-comparison of the mutation in related samples despite differences in tumor purity and/or copy number profiles.

### The genomic and epigenomic evolutionary history of papillary renal cell carcinomas - Zhu et al. 2020

whole-genome sequencing
(WGS) on 124 samples from 29 subjects, deep targeted sequencing on 139 samples from 38 subjects, SNP array genotyping on 101 samples from 38 subjects, andwe investigate ITH and clonal evolution of papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC) and rarer kidney cancer subtypes, integrating whole-genome sequencing and DNA methylation data. genome-wide methylation profiling on 139 samples from 28 subjects (Fig. 1b, more details in Supplementary Fig. 26). All assays were performed on tumor, metastasis and normal tissue samples, with the exception of the SNP array genotyping, which was conducted only on tumor samples.
Study

In con- trast to previous studies of ccRCC [clear cell RCC], in pRCC, driver gene mutations and most arm-level somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs) are clonal. 

These findings suggest that a single biopsy would be sufficient to identify the important genetic drivers and that targeting large- scale SCNAs may improve pRCC treatment, which is currently poor. 

we fully characterize the whole genome and DNA
methylation of pRCC and rarer kidney cancer subtypes, specifically examining both the core and periphery of selected tumors and, when available, metastatic lesions in order to investigate ITH and clonal evolution

pRCCs are characterized by

* clonal driver SNVs and arm-level somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs); 
* modest intratumor hetero- geneity of non-driver SNVs and methylation; 
* highly subclonal small SCNAs and SVs. 

Between pRCC subtypes, 

* type 1 displays near absence of SVs, 
* type 2 and rare subtypes, which are more aggressive, have many SVs. 
* integrated analysis ofepigenomic and genomic data shows congruent patterns of evolution

We examined multiple adjacent samples from the center of the tumor to the tumor’s periphery as well as a normal sample ~5 cm distant from each tumor, and, when feasible, metastatic regions in the adrenal gland

We also estimated the **sample purity** based on SCNAs or, in copy neutral samples, based on variant allele fraction (VAF) of single nucleotide variants (

The estimated purity based on WGS data were used to calculate precise **cancer cell fractions** (CCF) and hence to construct phylogenetic trees. 

Data on genome-wide methylation levels provided further information on epigenomic ITH.

Frequency of somatic mutations and germline variants.

Among the published kidney cancer driver genes, we observed that almost all driver SNVs (definition of driver muta- tions in “Methods” section) were clonal, in contrast to ccRCC

An analysis of the germline sequencing data provided evidence
of rare, potentially deleterious, germline variants in known cancer susceptibility genes

Phylogenetic trees show limited intratumor heterogeneity

To explore ITH and to understand the sequence of genomic changes, we first constructed phylogenetic trees based on subclone lineages for 14 tumors with at least three regional samples per tumor

We used a previously reported **Bayesian Dirichlet process**, DPClust17,**todefine subclones based on clusters of SNVs sharing similar CCF**, adjusting **for SCNAs and purity** estimated by the copy number caller Battenberg

Since **ITH can be influenced by the number of samples sequenced per tumor**, we used a recently proposed ITH metric, **average pairwise ITH** or **APITH**, to compare pRCC1 and pRCC2 ITH

**APITH** is defined as the **average genomic distance across all pairs of samples per tumor** and **does not depend on the overall number of samples** per tumor.

Based on the identification of subclones, the **SCHISM** program20 was applied to **construct phylogenetic trees**, which are consistent with the pigeonhole principle18 and the ‘crossing rule’.

* The root of the phylogenetic tree represents germline cells without somatic SNVs;
* the knot between the trunk and branches is the most-recent common ancestor (MRCA), whose mutations are also shared by cells within all lineages. 
* Each leaf represents a subclone;

Phyloge- netic trees with trunks that are long relative to the branches have lower levels of ITH. 

On average 70.0% of pRCC SNVs were in the trunk, with low ITH observed in both pRCC type 1 and 2

This contrasts with previous findings in ccRCC8,9,22 where approximately one-third of somatic mutations were truncal

subclones were not always confined to spatially
distinct regions in pRCC tumors. 

This suggests that pRCC tumor cells within the primary tumor may be motile, with the abilitytoskipnearby regions and spread directly to physically distant regions. 

Alternatively, tumors may have grown predominantly as a single expansion producing numerous inter- mixed sub-clones that are not subject to stringent selection, as it has been proposed in the “Big Bang” model

Many tumors displayed extensive intermixing of subclones, evidenced by the occurrence of a clone cluster at subclonal proportions across multiple samples.

In both of our metastatic cases, intermixing of subclones has extended to metastatic sites, pointing to the occurrence of polyclonal seeding as previously observed in metastatic prostate cancer

**Clonality of copy number alterations varies by size.**

We ana- lyzed SCNAs from WGS data by considering both total and minor copy numbers

If the SCNAs were shared across regions of the same tumor they were considered clonal; otherwise subclonal.

The clonal proportion of SCNAs for each tumor was calculated as the proportion of the genome with identical SCNAs across all regions. 

pRCC1 and, to a lesser extent, pRCC2 showed recurrent amplification of chromosomes 7 (which includes the MET gene), 17, 12, and 16 

We observed no genome doubling

we estimated the CCF of SCNAs at each region and calculated the average CCF of SCNAs across the primary and (if available) metastatic regions. We

Most arm-level SCNAs were clonal 

In contrast, we observed numerous small scale SCNAs shared by a subset of regions or existing in one region only, indicating SCNAs may be generated through chan- ging mutational processes, with small scale SCNAs occurring in the later evolutionary phase

, the size of intra- chromosomal SCNAs was larger for clonal than subclonal events across all tumors 

Hierarchical clustering showed that samples from the same
tumors tended to cluster together, suggesting a higher inter-tumor heterogeneity than ITH.

Meta- static lesions shared most SCNAs with their primary tumors, but also displayed metastasis-specific SCNAs indicating ongoing SCNA clonal evolution during metastasis

We further ordered the occurrence of driver mutations
relative to somatic copy number gains or loss of heterozygosity (LOH)18,29 and were able to infer the timing of some driver mutations 

**Frequency of SVs differs between pRCC1 and pRCC2.** 

Somatic SVs were called by the Meerkat algorithm30, which distinguishes a range of SVs and plausible underlying mechanisms, including retrotransposition events. 

pRCC2 had significantly more SV events per tumor

Tandem duplications, chromosomal translocations, and deletions were the most prevalent types of variant

Substantial variation in both the number and type of SVs was observed between tumors (Fig. 4a), again suggesting strong inter- tumor heterogeneity.

In contrast to arm-level SCNAs (Fig. 3a), most SVs were subclonal or late events within the tumors (Supplementary Fig. 15), appearing on the branches of the phylogenetic trees.

on average 40% ofSVs were shared among all regions of a tumor. This is consistent with the average CCF of SVs across regions; in

Moreover, we compared the breakpoints between all SCNAs (estimated by Battenberg) and SVs (estimated by Meerkat). These results suggest that Battenberg (and probably copy number callers in general) has poor sensitivity for calling certain types of SVs and shows the value of combined analysis of SVs and SCNAs

Mutational signatures and telomere length. 

De novo extraction of SNV mutational signatures identified the patterns of four distinct mutational signatures

signatures A through D are linear combinations of six previously known SNV mutational signatures

We also observed a small proportion of mutations attributed to the clock-like38 mutational signature 1 (3.5% of total SNVs) and signature 8

we found that the numbers of clonal muta- tions assigned to signature 1, 5 or 40 were significantly associated with age at diagnosis

We estimated telomere length (TL) based on the numbers
of telomere sequence (TTAGGG/CCCTAA)4 using TelSeq39. The normal and metastatic tissue samples on average had longer (8.51 kb, one side Mann–Whitney U test P value = 1.16 × 10−6) and shorter (4.4 kb, P value = 1.96 × 10−3) TL, respectively than the primary tumor tissue samples (6.12

To analyze **methylation ITH**, we chose the 1% of methylation probes in CpG sites with the greatest intratumoral methylation range and calculated the methylation ITH based on the Euclidean distances between regions

In gen- eral, methylation ITH was not high and similar across histological subtypes (Kruskal–Wallis

we calculated the Euclidean distance separately for SNVs and methylation levels (using the top 5000 most variable CpG probes) for each pair of tumor samples within a tumor

the difference in
methylation patterns between pairs of samples correlated strongly with pairwise differences in subclonal SNVs (P < 0.0001, R= 0.5) (Fig. 5a), implying c**ongruence between genomic and epigenomic evolutionary histories**. Although

Although methylation ITH was generally low, the analysis showed greater ITH in enhancer regions, and no ITH in promoter/5’UTR/1st exons or CpG island regions (Fig. 5b), suggesting a possible role of methylation ITH in shaping regulatory function, but tight control of the genome regions directly affecting gene expression

Unsupervised clustering analysis based on the 1% most variable
methylation probes clearly separated tumor samples from normal samples, and pRCC tumors from renal sarcoma

**samples with purity <30% clustered together** but separately from the normal or the tumor tissue samples, likely because they were enriched with stromal, immune or other non-epithelial cells.

they cluster separately from any tumor region likely because **methylation reflects the different tissue type** (adrenal

TCGA pan-can analyses, where methylation profiles have been used to infer cell-of-origin patterns across cancer types

**Somatic mutation calling from whole-genome sequencing data.** The analysis- ready BAM files from tumor, metastasis, and matched normal samples were used to call somatic variants by MuTect2 (GATK

**Identification of putative driver mutations and driver genes.** To create putative cancer driver gene and mutation lists, we first listed the putative cancer driver genes on the basis of recent large-scale TCGA Pan-kidney cohort (KICH +KIRC + KIRP) sequencing data (http://firebrowse.org), i.e., the significantly mutated genes identified by MutSig2CV algorithm with q value less than 0.1. In addition, we included the genes from the COSMIC cancer gene census list (May 2017, http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census) in the putative kidney driver gene set. Putative driver mutations were defined if they met one of the following requirements: (i) if the variant was predicted to be deleterious, including stop-gain, frameshift and splicing mutation, and had a SIFT63 score < 0.05 or a PolyPhen64 score >0.995 or a CCAD65 score >0.99; or (ii) If the variant was identified as a recurrent hotspot (statistically significant, http://cancerhotspots.org) or a 3D clustered hotspot (http://3dhotspots.org) in a population-scale cohort of tumor samples of various cancer types using a previously described methodology

**Germline variants in cancer susceptibility genes.** A germline variant was included if its minor allele frequency was <0.1% in an Italian whole-exome sequencing data from 1,368 subjects with no cancer68 and the GnomAD European- Non Finnish-specific data from 12,897 subjects69.

**Mutational signature analysis from whole-genome sequencing data**. Muta- tional signatures were extracted using our previously developed computational framework SigProfiler70. A

**Mutation clustering and phylogenetic tree construction and annotation.** Clustering of subclonal somatic substitutions in whole-genome data were analyzed using a Bayesian Dirichlet process (DP) in multiple dimensions across related samples; .Copy number changes called by the Battenberg algorithm and read count information of each mutation across all regions in the same tumor were used to calculate cancer cell fraction (CCF) and prepared as input for DPClust. **Clone clusters** were identified as local peaks in the posterior mutation density obtained from the DP. For each cluster, a region representing a ‘**basin of attraction**’ was defined by a set of planes running through the point of minimum density between each pair of cluster positions. **Mutation were assigned to the cluster** in whose basin of attraction they were most likely to fall, using posterior probabilities from the DP. This process was extended into multiple dimensions for the patients with multiple related samples. 

The tumor subsclonality phylogenetic reconstruction algorithm SCHISM20
(SubClonal Hierarchy Inference from Somatic Mutations) was used to **infer phylogenetic trees based on the CCF of final clone clusters**. The

Palimpsest29 was used to **time the chromosomal duplications**. The **ratio of duplicated/non-duplicated clone mutations** were used to time these events, with **early events having a low amount of duplicated mutations as compared to late events**

**Somatic copy-number alteration (SCNA) analysis.** Identification of clonal and subclonalcopy number alterations for each sample was performed with the **Bat- tenberg algorithm** ; the algorithm phases hetero- zygous SNPs with use of the 1000 genomes genotypes as a reference panel followed by correcting occasional errors in phasing in regions with low linkage dis- equilibrium. Segmentation is derived from b-allele frequency (BAF) values. T-tests are performed on the BAFs of each copy number segment to identify whether they correspond to the value resulting from a fully clonal copy number change. If not, the copy number segment is represented as a mixture of 2 different copy number states, with the fraction of cells bearing each copy number state estimated from the average BAF of the heterozygous SNPs in that segment. In addition, we applied a non-parametric joint segmentation approach in FACETs74 to validate the large-scale SCNA callings (Supplementary

**Somatic structural variant calling.** Meerkat algorithm30 to call somatic SVs and estimate the corresponding genomic positions of breakpoints from recalibrated BAM files. ; candidate breakpoints were first found based on soft-clipped and split reads, which requires identifying at least two discordant read pairs, with one read covering the actual breakpoint junction, and then confirmed to be the precise breakpoints by local alignments; Mutational mechanisms were predicted based on homology and sequencing fea- tures; The **CCF of SVs** in each region was estimated by Svclone77; the copy-number subclone information generated by the Battenberg algorithm18was used as input for the filter step. To substantially increase the number of variants available for clustering, we applied the **coclustering mode to estimate CCF for both SVs and SNVs simultaneously** and calculated the average CCF of SVs across regions.

**Somatic mutation calling from deep targeted sequencing data**. We utilized the WGS pipeline to process raw reads, align reads to the reference human genome hg19, and to call somatic SNVs by GATK MuTect2. W

**Copy-number analysis from genome-wide SNP genotyping data.** Genome Studio (Illumina, Inc.) was used to cluster and normalize raw genotyping data

**Analysis for DNA methylation profiling.** Genome-wide DNA methylation was profiled on Illumina Infinium methylation EPIC arrays (Illumina, San Diego, USA). Methylation of tumor and normal samples was measured according to the manufacturer’s instruction at CGR. Raw methylation densities were analyzed using the RnBeads pipeline79 and the minfi package80. “Functional Normal- ization”81, implemented in the minfi R package was used to perform normalization to obtain the final methylation levels (beta value). Hyper- and hypo-methylation were arbitrarily defined by at least 20% in-/decrease relative to the matched normal samples, respectively

**Unsupervised clustering of methylation profiles.** We selected the top 1% of probes with the greatest difference between maximum and minimum methylation; levels within each tumor. For hierarchical clustering, a Euclidean distance was calculated and Ward’s linkage was performed.

Heatmaps were drawn using the superheat (https://github.com/rlbarter/superheat) and ComplexHeatmap R package

**Measuring intratumoral heterogeneity of SNVs and methylation in genomic regions**. We measured genomic region-specific intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) of each tumor with at least three samples for DNA methylation levels. DNA methylation variability82 was calculated as median of the range of probes (max- imum methylation level - minimal methylation level) within a genomic region/ context among normal samples or within samples in each tumor. Interindividual variability was analyzed by comparing normal samples from all
subjects. The genomic region-specific methylation inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity was measured by the median methylation variability of involved CpG sitesacross different genomic regions/contexts

​    "The B-Allele Frequency is a normalized measure of the allelic intensity ratio of two alleles (A and B), such that a BAF of 1 or 0 indicates the complete absence of one of the two alleles (e.g. AA or BB), and a BAF of 0.5 indicates the equal presence of both alleles (e.g. AB)."

the “B” allele is the non-reference allele observed in a germline heterozygous SNP, i.e. in the normal/control sample. Since the tumor cells’ DNA originally derived from normal cells’ DNA, most of these SNPs will also be present in the tumor sample. But due to allele-specific copy number alterations, loss of heterozygosity or allelic imbalance, the allelic frequency of these SNPs may be different in the tumor, and that’s evidence that one (or both) of the germline copies was gained or lost during tumor evolution. The shift in b-allele frequency is calculated relative to the expected heterozygous frequency 0.5, and minor allele frequencies are “mirrored” above and below 0.5 so that it does not matter which allele is considered the reference – the relative shift from 0.5 will be the same either way.





### Genomic landscape and chronological reconstruction of driver events in multiple myeloma - Maura et al. 2019

we report a catalog and hierarchy of driver lesions using sequences from 67 MM [multiple myeloma] genomes serially collected from 30 patients together with public exome datasets

**Bayesian clustering** defines at least 7 genomic subgroups with distinct sets of co-operating events

complex structural events emerge as major drivers, including chromothripsis and a novel replication-based mechanism of templated insertions, which typically occur early

Hyperdiploidy also occurs early, with individual trisomies often acquired in different chronological windows during evolution, and with a preferred order of acquisition.

positively selected point mutations, whole genome duplication and chromoplexy events occur in later disease phases

SVs and recurrent CNAs are considered early drivers, being detectable also in premalignant stages of the disease

Cancer genes are also frequently altered by driver point mutations, with	

Many blood cancers develop along preferred evolutionary trajectories.

Early driver events, drawn from a restricted set of possible events, differ in which subsequent cancer genes confer clonal advantage, leading to considerable substructures of co- operativity and mutual exclusivity among cancer genes. These

although patients share a common histological and clinical phe- notype, the underlying biology is distinctly heterogeneous.

combine a large cohort of serial MM samples analyzed by whole-genome sequencing (WGS) with a publicly available dataset to define driver events and how they group across patients

WGS of 67 tumor samples collected at different time points from 30 MM patients, together with matched germline controls

published whole exome data from 804 patients within the CoMMpass trial

##### Landscape of driver mutations in MM.

**discover MM driver genes**, we analyzed the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations, correcting for mutational spectrum and covariates of mutation density across the genome with the **dNdScv** algorithm

average of 2.04 (0.98–3.08) drivers per sample

sig- nificant fraction of these driver point mutations was present in subclones of the myeloma rather than the ancestral clone, sug- gesting that they often play a role in later phases of cancer development (Supplementary

##### Dependencies of driver events.

pairwise comparisons, these cancer genes showed distinct patterns of co-mutation and mutual exclusivity both with each other and with recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities (Supplementary

pairwise approach does not have the power to detect tertiary, quaternary and higher-level interactions

higher- level statistics must be used to deconvolute the complex landscape ofMM and to identify subgroups of cases with a similar genomic landscape

we developed **a composite analysis employing both Bayesian networks and the hierarchical Dirichlet process (hdp)23 to define the conditional dependencies of all driver events** in MM and attempt a genomics-based classification of the disease

**Bayesian network (BN) analysis** identified both known and novel **patterns of higher-level co-occurrence and mutually exclusivity** between driver events.

*We built the optimal Bayesian network by considering the recurrent SVs and CNAs (n = 14) and driver SNVs (n = 55) across 724 MM patients*

Different from previous approaches9,13, our analysis included the full catalog of point mutations in MM driver genes (defined by dNdScv), recurrent SVs and CNAs, representing

##### Patterns of structural variation in myeloma.

2122 SVs, with a heterogeneous distribution across the cohort (median 26 per patients, range 0–129) suggesting that structural variation is a major force shaping the MM genome

ed a novel pattern of complex SVs,
recently observed in some solid cancers25, characterized by cycles of templated insertions, found

structural variation, accessing both simple and complex mechanisms of genome rearrangement, is an important process driving MM evolution

##### Timing of aneuploidies and SVs. 

investigate the temporal windows of occurrence of events in MM, mainly through the identification of subclonal (late) point mutations and SV appearing or disappearing in serial samples

add significant resolution to this analysis through integra- tion of SVs, CNAs, and point mutations. This

d significant karyotype changes within the same patient over time, including loss or acquisition of some gains in hyperdiploid patients (Supplemen-

4/30 patients acquiring a whole-genome duplication at relapse, highlighting how multiple gains events may play a sig- nificant role in relapsed/refractory stages and copy-number gains may be acquired in different time windows (

**even seemingly clonal CNAs could actually be acquired late** in a fraction of cells, but this could only
be revealed by analysis of serial samples

focus on the **relative order of acquisition of clonal chromosomal gains** in single samples through a **molecular time analysis based on the fraction of duplicated to single-copy clonal (early) point mutations**

concept underpinning this approach is that any trisomy should carry **a high number of duplicated clonal mutations if the gain occurred late** in MM evolution, but only few duplicated mutations in early gains 

the hallmark trisomies of hyperdiploidy tended to be present in the ancestral clone of the myeloma, but within a given patient were not always acquired simultaneously and rather showed an heterogenous pattern of accumulation

To validate this approach, we applied our molecular time analysis to serial samples. There, **apparently clonal CNAs on a single sample that were nevertheless unstable across the series were correctly assigned to a later time window**

could also time multiple duplications of the same chromosome; heterogenous pattern of accumulation (

Combining data from molecular time analysis and the clonality/stability of the trisomies over time, we reconstructed the timing of acquisition of aneuploidies in each patient and analyzed trends in the whole cohort

data consistent with the proposition that hyperdiploidy is an early driver event1,3, and suggests a potential early role of a single 1q gain in MM pathogenesis.

MM33,37.Chro- mothripsis and cycles of templated insertion events were mostly clonal and conserved during evolution

chromoplexy emerged as a late event being positively selected and/ or acquired at progression of smoldering into symptomatic MM (one patient) or at relapse (two patients)

##### Preferred evolutionary trajectories of myeloma development. 

We **integrated all extracted chronological data on SVs, hyperdi- ploidy and point mutations to generate phylogenetic trees** for each sample

Differently from previous studies, this analysis was **not just limited to the differentiation between clonal (early) and subclonal (late) events, but inferred molecular time data from other genomic events (i.e., SVs, CNAs, and driver mutations),** allowing assessment of the **order of acquisition of early clonal driver events** in MM in preclinical phases 

we were able to **chronologically reconstruct the order of acquisition of early and late (sub)clonal events** in all patients, potentially looking at timing of events acquired years before sampling

trunks of the phylogenetic trees of 29/30 (97%) patients were characterized by few genomic events, generally acquired during different time windows of the MM life history leading to the emergence of the most recent common ancestor

events were acquired with a nonrandom order. Overall,

chromothripsis, cycles of templated insertions, chromosomal gains and other SVs accounted for most of the earliest events, emerging as key drivers of disease initiation

Focal deletions on distinct oncogenes, whole-genome duplication and chromoplexy were generally acquired during progression and/or relapse, potentially representing new mechanisms of subclonal selection and treatment resistance

how this enriched view of the genome offered by WGS fitted within the groups identified by the combined hdp and BN clustering, based on whole-exome sequencing of the CoMMpass dataset

although exome/targeted approaches are able to characterize mutations, recurrent CNAs and oncogene transloca- tions, they are not completely able to fully decipher the MM genomic complexity

complex events such as chromothripsis and cycles of templated insertions are strongly players in MM, with an unexpectedly high prevalence that could not be captured by previous exome-based studies. Interestingly,

complex events had a key role in early phases of cancer development.

other events, such as focal deletions on oncogenes, chromoplexy and WGD, emerged as later aberrations potentially involved in drug resistance and relapse.

hyperdiploidy reflects the sum of
multiple and independent chromosomal gains over time, in contrast to prior hypotheses

combined chronological reconstruction of SNVs, CNAs,
and SVs suggests that MM development follows preferred evo- lutionary trajectories

limitation of exome/targeted sequencing approaches to fully decipher the complexity of MM

<u>Processing of genomic data</u>

* somatic substitutions called with CaVEMan 
* Indels called with modified Pindel
* SVs calling with BRASS 
*  Chromotripsis and chromoplexy defined as previously described; defined as complex events the fol- lowing SV classes: chromothripsis, templated insertions among three or more chromosomes, chromoplexy and all other complex events composed by more than 3 SVss
* Allele-specific CN analysis with ASCAT 
* evaluation of CN changes, also including subclonal and minor aberrations: Battenberg process
* cancer cell fraction (CCF) estimation for each sample: ASCAT and Battenberg 

<u>Driver mutations</u>

identify genes under positive selection = drivers of tumor progression

**dNdScv** method, which estimates the excess of nonsynonymous mutations while accounting for the mutational spectrum and gene-specific mutation rates

In addition to identifying **positively selected genes**, dNdScv estimates **the excess in nonsynonymous mutations across a set of genes**, making it possible to calculate **the average number of driver mutations** per sample

<u>BN analysis</u>

construction of the BN

* create a binary matrix of the presence/absence of genomic aberrations and mutations in each patient
* Gobnilp software used with default parameters
  * finds the globally optimal BN within the constraints set, by posing the learning of the BN structure as a linear optimization problem that is solved using integer linear programming via the SCIP Optimization suite
* For the resulting BN, we wrote bespoke functions in SWI-Prolog that find the logic gates combination which maximizes the Fisher exact test P value when regressing the parents against the child (fisher.test() R function)
  * Gate formulae are constructed by considering all possible gate combinations that involve the parental edges to a specific child node.
  *  From all the formulae we selected the one that maximizes the p value of the Fisher’s exact test and uses the least number of gates. 
  * Gate vectors are produced by performing the gate operation on its input vectors. 
  * The output vector can then be tested against the child vector.

The BN allows the identification of both complex and simple pattern
correlations of drivers. 

output composed by 2 different figures: 

(i) the global BN figure: all the gates/correlations are listed and connected;

(ii) the heatmap of driver events for each family in the BN, which allow easy interpretation by scientist through visual inspection

<u>Hierarchical Dirichlet process</u>. 

**hdp** software used to investigate the main MM genomic subgroups 

All dN/dS-extracted driver mutations and the most clinically relevant and recurrent CNAs and SVs were included, 

final exome-based clusters extracted combining the hdp and BN data

<u>Construction of subclone phylogeny</u>.

Somatic mutations clustered using a Bayesian clustering method

* assumes a mixture model for the counts of mutant and wild-type reads in a series of NGS read samples, and a Dirichlet process prior on the sequence of category (or cluster) weights
* .the count of reads carrying a particular mutation, in the reads from a specific tissue sample, follows a binomial distribution 
* Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampler (based on Gibbs sampling) used to sample from the pos- terior distribution of the subclone (cluster) weights, the subclone (cluster) assignments of the mutations, and the frequency of each subclone among the tumor cells from the specified tissue sample
* . MCMC sampler run for 1000 iterations, of which the first 300 were discarded
* MCMC output post- processed to obtain point estimates of: 
  * (i) the subclone (or cluster) weights; 
  * (ii) the assignment of mutations to subclones; 
  * (iii) the frequency of each subclone among the tumor cells from each tissue sample.

to identify the phylogenetic relationships between subclones, we followed the previously published approach, and this version of the “pigeonhole principle”: if the proportion of cells carrying mutation A is p_A, and the proportion carrying mutation B is p_B, and p_A+ p_B > 1, then at least one cell must carry both mutations A and B. We also assume that within a tumor, each mutation occurred as a unique event. So, p_A+ p_B > 1 and p_B < p_A implies that all cells which carry mutation B must also carry mutation A. 

relationships among subclones as a phylogenetic tree:

* each node = a subclone
* the branch which ends in a node as representing the same subclones as this node (it is more natural to think of branches as representing subclones in this way, as mutations occurred in some temporal order along each branch of the tree).

For any proposed set of parent–offspring relationships among a set of subclones, we can check if the above pigeonhole principle is respected by the subclone frequency parameters for every tissue sample. If the pigeonhole principle is respected for every tissue sample, then we say that this set of parent–offspring relationships is “allowed”. In practice, we relaxed this condition slightly, by introducing a “tolerated error” parameter, to which we have assigned the value 0.001. This means that when comparing the subclone frequencies of a subclone with its putative daughter subclones, we allow the total frequency of the daughter subclones to exceed the frequency of the parental subclone by as much as 0.001 before we declare a violation of the pigeonhole principle. We have also introduced an “acceptable mutant count” parameter, to which we have assigned the value 50. This means that all subclones which contain fewer than 50 mutations were excluded.

<u>Tree finding algorithm</u>.

algorithm to identify all trees which are allowed (compatible with the pigeonhole principle) by the subclone frequency parameters for every tissue sample

tree plots, the length of each tree branch is proportional to the number of mutations assigned to the corresponding subclone.

<u>Molecular time and copy-number timing</u>. 

During a copy-number gain, all SNVs already acquired on the involved allele will be duplicated as well

the variant allelic frequency corrected for the nontumor cells contamination (c- VAF) of all these clonal duplicated SNVs will change from 50% to ~66%, being present on two out of three alleles

all clonal SNVs occurred (i) anytime on the nonduplicated allele or (ii) on one of the two duplicated alleles after the duplication will have a c-VAF ~33% and all **subclonal SNVs will always occur on one single allele with a c-VAF <33%.**

assign each SNV to either a pregain or postgain status -> script that uses mclust R function for this analysis.

To avoid noise between the different clusters we applied a threshold below
which data points that belong to an alternative cluster are excluded from the timing calculation. This second part is based on the assumption that all patients’ chromosomes have a constant mutation rate 

Thanks to this approach we were **able to estimate the molecular time of each copy-number duplication**

The recurrent MM CNAs chronological acquisition order was estimated
combining the Battenberg CCF and molecular time data into a Bradley–Terry model

<u>Rearrangement timing</u>. 

Considering the number of reads supporting each rear- rangement breakpoint and adjusting this value for both copy-number and CCF, we were able to **estimate the adjusted VAF of each rearrangement** (r-VAF). 

During any copy-number gain, the r-VAF of clonal SVs will change similarly to that of SNVs. 

* if the r-VAF is ~66% of all tumor reads, the SV will be classified as “pregain” being present on two different duplicated alleles
* if the r- VAF supports the involvement of just one allele (~33%), it may have occurred either on the not-duplicated allele or on one of the two duplicated alleles
  * differentiated these 2 situations considering the status of any copy number generated
    *  by each SV 
      * , if occurring after a gain, any deletion on the not-duplicated allele will generate an CN-LOH (2:0); and an involvement of one duplicated allele will generate a normal diploid segment (1:1). 
      *  an involvement of the duplicated allele before the gain will generate a deletion (1:0) 
    * and/or by the presence of in phase SNV/SNPs within any SV reads. 
      *  based on the presence of one or more clonal SNVs or
        SNPs phased within the reads supporting the rearrangement 



### Genomic Evolution of Breast Cancer Metastasis and Article Genomic Evolution of Breast Cancer Metastasis and Relapse - Yates et al. 2017

sequencing primary, locally relapsed, and metastatic breast cancers

clones seeding metastasis or relapse disseminate late from primary tumors but continue to acquire mutations

Metastases mostly disseminate late from primary breast tumors, keeping most drivers

Mutational processes similar in primary and relapse; radiotherapy

We sequenced whole ge- nomes or a panel of 365 genes on 299 samples from 170 patients with locally relapsed or metastatic breast cancer.

clones seeding metastasis or relapse disseminate late from pri- mary tumors, but continue to acquire mutations, mostly accessing the same mutational processes active in the primary tumor

Most distant metastases acquired driver mutations not seen in the primary tumor, drawing from a wider repertoire of cancer genes than early drivers.

Breast cancer recurrence
can take two forms: distant metastasis (commonly bone, brain, liver, lung, and distant lymph nodes) and locoregional relapse (recurrence in breast, chest wall, or regional lymph nodes).

estrogen receptor (ER)-positive primary breast cancer has a characteristic ‘‘luminal’’ transcrip- tional profile with frequent somatic mutations activating PI3K- AKT signaling and inactivating GATA3 and the JUN kinase pathway

Breast cancers with amplification and/or overexpres- sion of ERBB2 (also known as HER2) have a distinct transcrip- tional and genomic profile, confirming

triple-negative breast cancers, are characterized by a ‘‘basal-like’’ transcriptional profile, frequent TP53 mutation, and extensive copy number variation. A

two major aims

1.  define pat- terns of **genomic evolution** between the primary cancer and dis- ease progression, 
   * whole-genome sequencing of 40 tumor samples from 17 patients to an average coverage of 423, together with matched germline DNA samples (
2. study the **distribution of driver mutations** in distant metastatic or locoregionally relapsed breast can- cer.
   * 227 recurrence samples from 163 patients for point mutations and copy number changes in 365 known cancer genes to

##### Evolution between Primary Breast Cancer and Metastasis/Relapse

To reconstruct the phylogenetic structure underlying disease progression, we applied bioinformatic and deductive reasoning approaches, as

**multi-dimensional Bayesian Dirichlet processes to cluster so- matic substitutions from multiple related samples according to their respective mutation burden, corrected for tumor cellularity, allele-specific copy number, and regions of differential chromo- somal deletion between samples**

an average of 2.8 distinct clusters per patient (48 in 17 patients)

. Individual clus- ters inform on the structure of the phylogenetic tree, typically enabling a single ‘‘tree solution’’ to be derived for each case.

the genomic landscape of
the primary breast cancer at diagnosis is a good surrogate for the somatic mutations present in disseminated cells at that moment in time

* the metastatic or relapsing clones branch late from the phylogenetic lineage of the primary breast lesion, with relatively few mutations private to the primary tumor
* he excess mutational burden of metachronous metastasis or relapse clones exceeded that of synchronous axillary lymph node me- tastases and the one synchronous distant metastasis
* driver mutations tend to be concentrated on the trunk of the phylogenetic tree
* whole-genome duplication, when present, precedes the branching of the recurrence clone

* the mutational pro- cesses active on the trunk of the phylogenetic tree tend to persist in the metastasis, suggesting

In modern breast cancer treatment, the major aim of chemotherapy or estrogen suppression is to kill those cells that have already spread from the primary lesion, since surgery and local radiotherapy are usually sufficient to cure the primary. If

##### Additional Burden of Mutations in Relapse Samples

the number of mutations private to the metastasis was broadly equivalent to the number private to the primary cancer

by virtue of being synchronous lesions, the major lineages in the primary and the metastasis had the same time period in which to accrue muta- tions after divergence.

for the local relapse and metachronous distant metastasis samples, the relapse carried, on average, 63% more mutations than the primary tumor, albeit with considerable variability among patients (range,

The number of additional mutations in the relapse only loosely correlated with the time elapsed between diagnosis of the primary cancer and relapse

To assess which mutational signatures are most significant at different stages of disease evolution, we examined their relative contributions to each branch of the phylogenetic tree

**heterogeneity in mutational signatures across patients is considerably greater than the heterogeneity across different evolutionary stages** within a given tumor. This

This suggests that a given breast tumor ac- cesses only a subset of the mutational processes potentially available to it, but those mutational processes contribute genomic variation on an ongoing basis. 

Nonetheless, there are some shifts in the relative contributions of mutational processes over time.

##### Telomere Integrity during Cancer Evolution 

We estimated telomere lengths from whole-genome data for germline and tumor samples. T

s no simple relationship between telomere length and the number of somatic substitutions, indels, or structural variation within tumor samples

##### Driver Mutations Are Acquired during Cancer Progression

manually curated the driver mutations	

most driver mutations occurred in the primary tumor and were located on the trunk of the phylogenetic tree

whole-genome duplication, all driver mutations arose prior to this event, indicating that they are usually relatively early events in cancer evolution. Among

one or two additional driver mutations specific to the metastasis sample, suggesting that growth of the metastatic clone in its new niche is abetted by further genomic evolution. We

distant metastasis and locore-
gional relapses are typically associated with acquisition of addi- tional driver mutations compared with the primary tumor, whereas driver mutations in synchronous lymph node metasta- ses are typically also present in the primary

##### The Driver Landscape of Relapse and Metastasis

sequencing of all coding exons of 365 known cancer genes in 227 samples from distant metastases or locoregional relapses across 163 patients.

Samples that were from local relapses or metastases harbored a higher number of driver point mutations on average than those in the primary tumor cohort (2.0 versus 1.6

**compared the rate of non-synonymous mutations with synonymous mutations** across the 365 genes; well established for inferring selection in comparative genetics, was adapted for somatic mutations; taking account of the trinucleotide composition of the genes, gene size, mutation spectrum, and local variation in mutation rates across the genome

##### Driver Mutations Acquired Late Encompass a Wider Range of Cancer Genes

enrichment of driver mutations in relapse/metastasis samples compared with the cohort of primary breast cancers.

* might be that those primary breast cancers with a more disordered genome are more likely to subsequently relapse;
* or it might be that the relapsing clone con- tinues to acquire new driver mutations after dissemination from the primary lesion. We

Mutations in well-known, relatively frequent breast cancer
genes, typically found in both the primary and the recurrence sam- ples.

mutations in less frequent cancer genes were often found only in the recurrence. This

##### Late JAK-STAT Pathway Inactivation

Interestingly, JAK2 and STAT3 were identified as significantly mutated in the metastasis/relapse screen even though they had not been discovered in the earlier (and larger) exome studies of primary breast cancers (Banerji

JAK2 and STAT3 mutations both showed a trend toward being
more frequent in distant metastasis samples

inactivation of JAK-STAT signaling appears to con-
tribute to disease progression and metastasis in some patients with breast cancer.

Cancers with JAK2 or STAT3 truncating mutations contained a higher number of point mutations on average than other cancers

consistent with the notion that these cancers may contain more neoantigens, stimulating a more exuberant native immune response, and driving selection of JAK-STAT pathway inactivation.


##### Treatment Exposures Influence Breast Cancer Evolution

broadening of the repertoire of cancer genes sampled by late driver mutations

selective pressures exerted

*  by therapeutic interventions,
*  by the immune system responding to the expansion of a clone carrying many neoantigens,
*  by the very different microenvi- ronment in a metastatic site compared with breast epithelium

oncogene amplification or activation may represent a common mode of breast cancer evolution in the face of endocrine therapy

##### Multi-Sample Mutation Calling 

Substitutions, indels and structural variant breakpoints were called independently in each tumor sample using mutation calling algo- rithms (CaVEMan, Pindel and BRASS) and

##### Cancer Gene Discovery 

To identify recurrently mutated driver genes we used **dNdScv**,

* uses dN/dS and covariates to detect genes with higher density of non-synonymous coding mutations than expected by chance.

##### Driver Mutation Annotation 

Each coding variant was manually curated with a likely driver status following a systematic approach.

##### Genome-Wide Subclonal Copy Number Analyses 

Segmental copy number information :ASCAT algorithm

Battenberg algorithm to identify clonal and sub- clonal copy number changes; also used to challenge and confirm copy number and ploidy estimates derived from ASCAT.

##### Genome-Wide Multi-Sample Clonality Analyses

bioinformatics and **deductive reasoning** approaches

3 main steps 

1. the identification of **large-scale subclonal copy number changes** using the Battenberg algorithm
2. **clustering** of subclonal somatic substitutions using a **Bayesian Dirichlet process in multiple dimensions** across related samples 
3. **hierarchical ordering** across multiple samples using the ‘**pigeon hole principle**’. 

##### Mutation Timing in Multi-Sample Analyses 

The relative contribution of the different mutation types during evolution estimated by **comparing the proportion of mutations that were shared, private to the primary tumor sample or private to the metastasis/ relapse sample**.

 Each individual point mutation was assigned to one of these categories by calculating for each mutation, in all related samples independently, R’s pbino- mial statistic based upon a conservative, expected error rate of 1 in 200. 

A mutation was deemed to be present or absent from an individual sample based upon a p value of <=0.05 or > 0.05 respectively. 

All structural variants reconstructed in silico were deter- mined to be shared or private to the primary/ metastasis samples based upon either reconstruction in related samples or the pres- ence of 4 or more split reads supporting the breakpoint using BRASS1. 

**Substitution branch timing calculated using mutation clustering where the cluster size dictates the branch length**

##### Whole Genome Duplication Timing Analysis

estimated the prevalence of **3 different developmental stages**

1. diploid stage previous to whole genome duplication
2.  tetraploid cell stage after the whole genome duplication previous to the subclonal diversification
3.  timing between the last selective sweep and the emergence of the detected subclones. 

**duration** of each of the stages in molecular time **estimated via the fraction of mutations having arisen in each of the phases**. 

estimate the proportions of mutations in each stage we employ a strategy similar to that of Purdom et al. (Purdom et al., 2013) and extend it to subclonal mutations. (based on purity, allele frequencies and prevalence of subclone)

**Mutational Signature Analysis** 

We assessed the relative activity of mutational processes over time by allocating somatic mutations to their specific branch of the phylogenetic tree and subjecting individual branches (composed of more than 20 mutations) to mutational signature analysis

detected in two independent ways: 

1. (i) de novo extraction based on somatic substitutions and their immediate sequence context and 
2. (ii) refitting of previously identified consensus signatures of mutational processes. The

##### Telomere Length Estimates 

Telomerecat is a de novo method for the estimation of telomere length from whole genome sequencing samples. T

​	
